 Voice-Activated AI Chatbot using Streamlit
Overview
This project is a Voice-Enabled AI Chatbot built with Python and Streamlit. It uses speech recognition to listen to voice commands, text-to-speech to respond, and performs real-time tasks like fetching information from Wikipedia, opening websites, managing notes, and greeting the user contextually. The app can be controlled by both voice and text input.
Features
• Voice Recognition — Understands spoken commands via the microphone.
• Text-to-Speech Response — Responds back using realistic voice.
• Wikipedia Integration — Fetches and reads summaries for queries.
• Smart Greetings — Greets the user based on the time of day.
• Note-Taking — Save and display notes interactively.
• Web Automation — Opens websites like YouTube, Google, or GitHub by command.
• Dual Interaction — Accepts both voice and typed commands.
• Exit Control — Stops listening until the user resumes manually.
Project Structure
📁 Voice_Chatbot/
├── app.py                # Main Streamlit application file
├── notes.txt             # Saved notes file (auto-generated)
├── requirements.txt      # Dependencies
└── README.md             # Project documentation
Installation
1️⃣ Clone this repository:
git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/voice-chatbot.git
cd voice-chatbot
2️⃣ Create a virtual environment (optional but recommended):
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate   # for Mac/Linux
venv\Scripts\activate      # for Windows
3️⃣ Install dependencies:
pip install -r requirements.txt
If you don’t have a requirements.txt yet, create one with:
streamlit
speechrecognition
pyttsx3
wikipedia
pyaudio
Run the App
Start the chatbot locally using:
streamlit run app.py
The app will open automatically in your browser at http://localhost:8501
How It Works
1. Speech Recognition — Listens to your voice using the microphone.
2. Command Processing — Interprets and cleans your spoken or typed command.
3. Response Logic — Fetches data, opens websites, or saves notes.
4. Text-to-Speech — Speaks the response using pyttsx3.
5. Persistent Notes — All saved notes are stored in notes.txt and visible in the sidebar.
Example Commands
Command	Action
Hello	Greets back
What is artificial intelligence	Reads a Wikipedia summary
Open YouTube	Opens YouTube in browser
Remember to buy milk	Saves the note
Show notes	Displays saved notes
What’s the time	Reads the current time
Exit or Stop listening	Pauses the chatbot
Technologies Used
• Python 3.x
• Streamlit — Web-based UI framework
• SpeechRecognition — For voice-to-text conversion
• pyttsx3 — For text-to-speech output
• Wikipedia API — To fetch definitions and summaries
• Regex, Datetime, OS, Webbrowser — For logic and utility functions
Future Enhancements
• Add voice emotion detection for dynamic responses.
• Integrate ChatGPT API for conversational AI.
• Create personalized memory storage (SQLite-based).
• Add multi-language support.
• Deploy on Streamlit Cloud or Render.
Author
Venkata Varma Vatsavayi
AI & Data Science Enthusiast | Passionate about Speech Interfaces and Automation

